#Abstract
Biological soil crusts (BSC) are key components of ecosystem productivity
contributing significantly to the nitrogen (N) budget of arid ecosystems. BSC
N~2~-fixation is attributed to heterocystous cyanobacteria and BSC diazotrophs
from early-successional and mature crusts have been extensively studied by
profiling BSC nifH gene content. Published surveys of BSC *nifH* gene content
show *nifH* genes PCR amplified and sequenced from BSC are predominantly
cyanobacterial. Early successional crusts possess few N~2~-fixing cyanobacteria
but can fix N~2~ at rates comparable to mature crusts where heterocystous
cyanobacteria are more common suggesting microorganisms other than
cyanobacteria may mediate N~2~-fixation during the critical early stages of BSC
development. DNA stable isotope probing (DNA-SIP) with ^15^N~2~ revealed that
*Clostridiaceae* and *Proteobacteria* are the most common microorganisms that
assimilate ^15^N in early successional crusts. Specifically, 34 OTUs were found
to incorporate ^15^N from ^15^N~2~ during experimental incubations.
^15^N-responsive OTUs were members of the *Firmicutes* (19 OTUs),
*Proteobacteria* (12 OTUs), *Actinobacteria* (2 OTUs) and *Gemmatimonadetes* (1
OTU). Thirty-eight percent of ^15^N-responsive OTUs have been observed
previously in published SSU rRNA gene surveys of BSC. The median abundance (of
abundances greater than zero) of ^15^N-responsive OTUs in SSU rRNA gene
collections from environmental BSC samples is less than 5 in 10,000 sequences.
^15^N-responsive Firmicutes OTUs were predominantly *Clostridiaceae*.
Proteobacterial ^15^N-responsive OTUs were predominantly *Gammaproteobacteria*
and proteobacterial OTUs that most conclusively incorporated ^15^N from
^15^N~2~ into biomass shared at least 95% 16S rRNA gene sequence identity with
isolates in genera possessing known N~2~-fixers including *Pseudomonas*,
*Klebsiella*, *Shigella*, and *Ideonella*. The low abundance of
non-phototrophic diazotrophs in BSC may explain why they have not previously
been characterized. Diazotrophs play a critical role in BSC formation and
characterization of these organisms represents a crucial step towards
understanding how anthropogenic change will affect the formation and ecological
function of BSC in arid ecosystems.
