Abstract
========

Biological soil crusts (BSC) are key components of ecosystem productivity contributing significantly to the nitrogen (N) budget of arid ecosystems. BSC N<sub>2</sub>-fixation is attributed to heterocystous cyanobacteria and BSC diazotrophs from early-successional and mature crusts have been extensively studied by profiling BSC nifH gene content. Published surveys of BSC *nifH* gene content show *nifH* genes PCR amplified and sequenced from BSC are predominantly cyanobacterial. Early successional crusts possess few N<sub>2</sub>-fixing cyanobacteria but can fix N<sub>2</sub> at rates comparable to mature crusts where heterocystous cyanobacteria are more common suggesting microorganisms other than cyanobacteria may mediate N<sub>2</sub>-fixation during the critical early stages of BSC development. DNA stable isotope probing (DNA-SIP) with <sup>15</sup>N<sub>2</sub> revealed that *Clostridiaceae* and *Proteobacteria* are the most common microorganisms that assimilate <sup>15</sup>N in early successional crusts. Specifically, 34 OTUs were found to incorporate <sup>15</sup>N from <sup>15</sup>N<sub>2</sub> during experimental incubations. <sup>15</sup>N-responsive OTUs were members of the *Firmicutes* (19 OTUs), *Proteobacteria* (12 OTUs), *Actinobacteria* (2 OTUs) and *Gemmatimonadetes* (1 OTU). Thirty-eight percent of <sup>15</sup>N-responsive OTUs have been observed previously in published SSU rRNA gene surveys of BSC. The median abundance (of abundances greater than zero) of <sup>15</sup>N-responsive OTUs in SSU rRNA gene collections from environmental BSC samples is less than 5 in 10,000 sequences. <sup>15</sup>N-responsive Firmicutes OTUs were predominantly *Clostridiaceae*. Proteobacterial <sup>15</sup>N-responsive OTUs were predominantly *Gammaproteobacteria* and proteobacterial OTUs that most conclusively incorporated <sup>15</sup>N from <sup>15</sup>N<sub>2</sub> into biomass shared at least 95% 16S rRNA gene sequence identity with isolates in genera possessing known N<sub>2</sub>-fixers including *Pseudomonas*, *Klebsiella*, *Shigella*, and *Ideonella*. The low abundance of non-phototrophic diazotrophs in BSC may explain why they have not previously been characterized. Diazotrophs play a critical role in BSC formation and characterization of these organisms represents a crucial step towards understanding how anthropogenic change will affect the formation and ecological function of BSC in arid ecosystems.
